NNNNNOOOOOTTTTTEEEEESSSSS FFFFFOOOOORRRRR TTTTTHHHHHEEEEE TTTTTEEEEEAAAAACCCCCHHHHHEEEEERRRRR
CHAPTER 4 : GLOBALISATION AND THE INDIAN ECONOMY
Most regions of the world are getting increasingly of trade and investment policies and, pressures
interconnected. While this interconnectedness from international organisations such as the
across countries has many dimensions — WTO. Improvement in technology is a fascinating
cultural, political, social and economic — this area for students and you may, with a few
chapter looks at globalisation in a more limited directions, encourage them to do their own
sense. It defines globalisation as the integration explorations. While discussing liberalisation, you
between countries through foreign trade and have to keep in mind that the students are
foreign investments by multinational unaware of what India was like in the
corporations (MNCs). As you will notice, the more pre-liberalisation era. A role-play could be
complex issues of portfolio investment have been conceived to compare and contrast the pre and
left out. post-liberalisation era. Similarly, international
negotiations under WTO and the uneven
If we look at the past thirty years or so, we
balances in power are interesting subjects that
find that MNCs have been a major force in the
can be covered in a discussion mode rather than
globalisation process connecting distant regions
as lectures.
of the world. Why are the MNCs spreading their
production to other countries and what are the The final section covers the impact of
ways in which they are doing so? The first part globalisation. To what extent has globalisation
of the chapter discusses this. Rather than contributed to the development process? This
relying on quantitative estimates, the rapid rise section draws on the topics covered in Chapters
and influence of the MNCs has been shown 1 and 2 (for example, what is a fair development
through a variety of examples, mainly drawn goal), which you can refer to. Also, examples and
from the Indian context. Note that the examples activities drawn from the local environment are
are an aid to explain a more general point. While a must while discussing this section. This might
teaching, the emphasis should be on the ideas include contexts that have not been covered in
and examples are to be used as illustrations. the chapter, such as the impact of imports on
You can also creatively use comprehension local farmers, etc. Collective brainstorming
passages like the one given after Section II to sessions can be conducted to analyse such
test and reinforce new concepts. situations.
Integration of production and integration of Sources for Information
markets is a key idea behind understanding the
process of globalisation and its impact. This has The call for a fairer globalisation has been given,
been dealt with at length in this chapter, among others, by the International Labour
highlighting the role of MNCs in the process. You Organisation — www.ilo.org. Another interesting
have to ensure that the students grasp this idea resource is the WTO website http://www.wto.org.
with sufficient clarity, before moving on to the It gives access to the variety of agreements that
next topic. are being negotiated at the WTO. For company
related information, most MNCs have their own
Globalisation has been facilitated by several
websites. If you want to critically look at
factors. Three of these have been highlighted:
the MNCs, one recommended website is
rapid improvements in technology, liberalisation
www.corporatewatch.org.uk.
5555544444 UUUUU EEEEE DDDDD
NNNNNDDDDDEEEEERRRRRSSSSSTTTTTAAAAANNNNNDDDDDIIIIINNNNNGGGGG CCCCCOOOOONNNNNOOOOOMMMMMIIIIICCCCC EEEEEVVVVVEEEEELLLLLOOOOOPPPPPMMMMMEEEEENNNNNTTTTT
Reprint 2026-27

CHAPTER 4
GGGGGLLLLLOOOOOBBBBBAAAAALLLLLIIIIISSSSSAAAAATTTTTIIIIIOOOOONNNNN
AAAAANNNNNDDDDD TTTTTHHHHHEEEEE IIIIINNNNNDDDDDIIIIIAAAAANNNNN EEEEECCCCCOOOOONNNNNOOOOOMMMMMYYYYY
As consumers in today’s world, some
of us have a wide choice of goods and
services before us. The latest models
of digital cameras, mobile phones and
televisions made by the leading
manufacturers of the world are within
our reach. Every season, new models
of automobiles can be seen on Indian
roads. Gone are the days when
Ambassador and Fiat were the only
cars on Indian roads. Today, Indians
are buying cars produced by nearly
all the top companies in the world. A
similar explosion of brands can be
seen for many other goods: from shirts
to televisions to processed fruit juices.
Such wide-ranging choice of goods
in our markets is a relatively recent
phenomenon. You wouldn’t have
found such a wide variety of goods in
Indian markets even two decades
back. In a matter of years, our
markets have been transformed!
How do we understand these
rapid transformations? What are the
factors that are bringing about these
changes? And, how are these changes
affecting the lives of the people?
We shall dwell on these questions in
this chapter.
GGGGG IIIII EEEEE 5555555555
LLLLLOOOOOBBBBBAAAAALLLLLIIIIISSSSSAAAAATTTTTIIIIIOOOOONNNNN AAAAANNNNNDDDDD TTTTTHHHHHEEEEE NNNNNDDDDDIIIIIAAAAANNNNN CCCCCOOOOONNNNNOOOOOMMMMMYYYYY
Reprint 2026-27

PRODUCTION ACROSS COUNTRIES
Until the middle of the twentieth multinational corporations (MNCs)
century, production was largely emerged on the scene. A MNC is a
organised within countries. What company that owns or controls
crossed the boundaries of these production in more than one nation.
countries were raw material, food stuff MNCs set up offices and factories for
and finished products. Colonies such production in regions where they can
as India exported raw materials and get cheap labour and other resources.
food stuff and imported finished This is done so that the cost of
goods. Trade was the main channel production is low and the MNCs can
connecting distant countries. This was earn greater profits. Consider the
before large companies called following example.
SSSSSppppprrrrreeeeeaaaaadddddiiiiinnnnnggggg ooooofffff PPPPPrrrrroooooddddduuuuuccccctttttiiiiiooooonnnnn
bbbbbyyyyy aaaaannnnn MMMMMNNNNNCCCCC
A large MNC, producing industrial equipment, designs its
products in research centres in the United States, and then
has the components manufactured in China. These are then
shipped to Mexico and Eastern Europe where the products
are assembled and the finished products are sold all over the
world. Meanwhile, the company’s customer care is carried out
through call centres located in India.
This is a call centre in Bengaluru, equipped with telecom facilities and access to
the Internet to provide information and support to customers abroad.
5555566666 UUUUU EEEEE DDDDD
NNNNNDDDDDEEEEERRRRRSSSSSTTTTTAAAAANNNNNDDDDDIIIIINNNNNGGGGG CCCCCOOOOONNNNNOOOOOMMMMMIIIIICCCCC EEEEEVVVVVEEEEELLLLLOOOOOPPPPPMMMMMEEEEENNNNNTTTTT
Reprint 2026-27

In this example the MNC is not only for their closeness to the markets
selling its finished products globally, in the US and Europe. India has
but more important, the goods and highly skilled engineers who can
services are produced globally. As understand the technical aspects of
a result, production is organised in production. It also has educated
increasingly complex ways. The English speaking youth who can
production process is divided into provide customer care services. And
small parts and spread out across the all this probably can mean 50-60 per
globe. In the above example, China cent cost-savings for the MNC!
provides the advantage of being a The advantage of spreading out
cheap manufacturing location. production across the borders to the
Mexico and Eastern Europe are useful multinationals can be truly immense.
LET’S WORK THIS OUT
Complete the following statement to show how the production process in the garment
industry is spread across countries.
The brand tag says ‘Made in Thailand’ but they are not Thai products. We dissect
the manufacturing process and look for the best solution at each step. We are
doing it globally. In making garments, the company may, for example, get cotton
fibre from Korea, ........
INTERLINKING PRODUCTION ACROSS
COUNTRIES
In general, MNCs set up production At times, MNCs set up production
where it is close to the markets; where jointly with some of the local
there is skilled and unskilled labour companies of these countries. The
available at low costs; and where the benefit to the local company of such
availability of other factors of joint production is two-fold. First,
production is assured. In addition, MNCs can provide money for
MNCs might look for government additional investments, like buying
policies that look after their interests. new machines for faster production.
You will read more about the policies Second, MNCs might bring with them
WE WILL SHIFT
later in the chapter. the latest technology for production. THIS FACTORY TO
ANOTHER COUNTRY.
Having assured themselves of these IT HAS BECOME
conditions, MNCs set up factories and EXPENSIVE HERE!
offices for production. The money that
is spent to buy assets such as land,
building, machines and other
equipment is called investment.
Investment made by MNCs is called
foreign investment. Any investment
is made with the hope that these
assets will earn profits.
GGGGG IIIII EEEEE 5555577777
LLLLLOOOOOBBBBBAAAAALLLLLIIIIISSSSSAAAAATTTTTIIIIIOOOOONNNNN AAAAANNNNNDDDDD TTTTTHHHHHEEEEE NNNNNDDDDDIIIIIAAAAANNNNN CCCCCOOOOONNNNNOOOOOMMMMMYYYYY
Reprint 2026-27

But the most common route for
MNC investments is to buy up local
companies and then to expand
production. MNCs with huge wealth
can quite easily do so. To take an
example, Cargill Foods, a very large
American MNC, has bought over
smaller Indian companies such as
Parakh Foods. Parakh Foods had
built a large marketing network in
various parts of India, where its brand
was well-reputed. Also, Parakh Foods
had four oil refineries, whose control
has now shifted to Cargill. Cargill is
now the largest producer of edible oil
in India, with a capacity to make 5
million pouches daily!
In fact, many of the top MNCs
have wealth exceeding the entire
budgets of the developing country Jeans produced in developing countries being
sold in USA for Rs 6500 ($145)
governments. With such enormous
wealth, imagine the power and
influence of these MNCs!
There’s another way in which The products are supplied to the
MNCs control production. Large MNCs, which then sell these under
MNCs in developed countries place their own brand names to the
orders for production with small customers. These large MNCs have
producers. Garments, footwear, tremendous power to determine price,
sports items are examples of quality, delivery, and labour
industries where production is conditions for these distant
carried out by a large number of producers.
small producers around the world.
Thus, we see that there are a
variety of ways in which the MNCs are
Women at home in Ludhiana making footballs for large MNCs
spreading their production and
interacting with local producers in
various countries across the globe. By
setting up partnerships with local
companies, by using the local
companies for supplies, by closely
competing with the local companies
or buying them up, MNCs are exerting
a strong influence on production
at these distant locations. As a
result, production in these widely
dispersed locations is getting
interlinked.
5555588888 UUUUU EEEEE DDDDD
NNNNNDDDDDEEEEERRRRRSSSSSTTTTTAAAAANNNNNDDDDDIIIIINNNNNGGGGG CCCCCOOOOONNNNNOOOOOMMMMMIIIIICCCCC EEEEEVVVVVEEEEELLLLLOOOOOPPPPPMMMMMEEEEENNNNNTTTTT
Reprint 2026-27

LET’S WORK THESE OUT
Ford Motors, an American Read the passage on the left and answer the questions.
company, is one of the
countries.
world’s largest automobile
manufacturers with 1.Would you say Ford Motors is a MNC? Why?
production spread over 26 2.What is foreign investment? How much did Ford Motors invest in India?
countries of the world. 3.By setting up their production plants in India, MNCs such as Ford
Ford Motors came to India Motors tap the advantage not only of the large markets that countries
such as India provide, but also the lower costs of production. Explain
in 1995 and spent Rs.
the statement.
1700 crore to set up a
4.Why do you think the company wants to develop India as a base for
large plant near Chennai.
manufacturing car components for its global operations? Discuss the
This was done in following factors:
collaboration with (a)cost of labour and other resources in India
Mahindra and Mahindra, (b)the presence of several local manufacturers who supply auto-
a major Indian parts to Ford Motors
manufacturer of jeeps and (c) closeness to a large number of buyers in India and China
trucks. By the year 2017, 5.In what ways will the production of cars by Ford Motors in India lead to
interlinking of production?
Ford Motors was selling
88,000 cars in the Indian 6.In what ways is a MNC different from other companies?
markets, 7.Nearly all major multinationals are American, Japanese or European,
such as Nike, Coca-Cola, Pepsi, Honda, Nokia. Can you guess why?
while another 1,81,000
cars were exported from
India to South Africa,
Mexico, Brazil and United
States of America. In
recent years, Ford
Company stopped
producing cars for selling
in India but export cars
and car engines on a
Cars made by Indian workers being
small scale to other transported to be sold abroad by MNCs.
FOREIGN TRADE AND INTEGRATION
OF MARKETS
For a long time foreign trade has been To put it simply, foreign trade
the main channel connecting creates an opportunity for the
countries. In history you would have producers to reach beyond the
read about the trade routes domestic markets, i.e., markets of their
connecting India and South Asia to own countries. Producers can sell their
markets both in the East and West produce not only in markets located
and the extensive trade that took within the country but can also compete
place along these routes. Also, you in markets located in other countries
would remember that it was trading of the world. Similarly, for the buyers,
interests which attracted various import of goods produced in another
trading companies such as the East country is one way of expanding the
India Company to India. What then choice of goods beyond what is
is the basic function of foreign trade? domestically produced.
GGGGG IIIII EEEEE 5555599999
LLLLLOOOOOBBBBBAAAAALLLLLIIIIISSSSSAAAAATTTTTIIIIIOOOOONNNNN AAAAANNNNNDDDDD TTTTTHHHHHEEEEE NNNNNDDDDDIIIIIAAAAANNNNN CCCCCOOOOONNNNNOOOOOMMMMMYYYYY
Reprint 2026-27

tL he rt
o
u us
g
hs e te
h
eth ee
x
e af mfe pc lt
e
o of ff o Cr he ii ngn es t er a td oye s
in the Indian
markets.
CCCCChhhhhiiiiinnnnneeeeessssseeeee TTTTToooooyyyyysssss iiiiinnnnn IIIIInnnnndddddiiiiiaaaaa
Chinese manufacturers learn What is happening here? As a
of an opportunity to export toys result of trade, Chinese toys
to India, where toys are sold at come into the Indian markets.
a high price. They start In the competition between
exporting plastic toys to India. Indian and Chinese toys,
Buyers in India now have the Chinese toys prove better.
option of choosing between Indian buyers have a greater
Indian and the Chinese toys. choice of toys and at lower
Because of the cheaper prices prices. For the Chinese toy
and new designs, Chinese toys makers, this provides an
become more popular in the opportunity to expand business.
Indian markets. Within a year, The opposite is true for Indian
70 to 80 per cent of the toy toy makers. They face losses,
shops have replaced Indian as their toys are selling
toys with Chinese toys. Toys much less.
are now cheaper in the Indian
markets than earlier.
6666600000 UUUUU EEEEE DDDDD
NNNNNDDDDDEEEEERRRRRSSSSSTTTTTAAAAANNNNNDDDDDIIIIINNNNNGGGGG CCCCCOOOOONNNNNOOOOOMMMMMIIIIICCCCC EEEEEVVVVVEEEEELLLLLOOOOOPPPPPMMMMMEEEEENNNNNTTTTT
Reprint 2026-27

In general, with the opening of
trade, goods travel from one market
to another. Choice of goods in the
markets rises. Prices of similar goods
in the two markets tend to become
equal. And, producers in the two
countries now closely compete against
each other even though they are
separated by thousands of miles!
Foreign trade thus results in
connecting the markets or
integration of markets in different
countries.
Small traders of readymade garments facing stiff
competition from both the MNC brands and imports.
LET’S WORK THESE OUT
1. What was the main channel connecting countries in the past? How is it different
now?
2. Distinguish between foreign trade and foreign investment.
3. In recent years China has been importing steel from India. Explain how the import
of steel by China will affect.
(a) steel companies in China.
(b) steel companies in India.
(c) industries buying steel for production of other industrial goods in China.
4. How will the import of steel from India into the Chinese markets lead to integration
of markets for steel in the two countries? Explain.
WHAT IS GLOBALISATION?
In the past two to three decades, more
and more MNCs have been looking for
locations around the world which
would be cheap for their production.
Foreign investment by MNCs in these BE CAREFUL! THAT’S
countries has been rising. At the same OOOOOUUUUURRRRR WORLD YOU’RE
PLAYING WITH!
time, foreign trade between countries
SOMEDAY YOU’LL
has been rising rapidly. A large part
HAVE TO PAY THE
of the foreign trade is also controlled PRICE!
by MNCs. For instance, the car
GLOBALISATION
manufacturing plant of Ford Motors
IS FUN!
in India not only produces cars for the
Indian markets, it also exports cars
to other developing countries and
exports car components for its many
factories around the world. Likewise,
activities of most MNCs involve
substantial trade in goods and also
services.
GGGGG IIIII EEEEE 6666611111
LLLLLOOOOOBBBBBAAAAALLLLLIIIIISSSSSAAAAATTTTTIIIIIOOOOONNNNN AAAAANNNNNDDDDD TTTTTHHHHHEEEEE NNNNNDDDDDIIIIIAAAAANNNNN CCCCCOOOOONNNNNOOOOOMMMMMYYYYY
Reprint 2026-27

The result of greater foreign contact with each other than a few
investment and greater foreign trade decades back.
has been greater integration of
Besides the movements of goods,
production and markets across
services, investments and technology,
countries. Globalisation is this
there is one more way in which the
process of rapid integration or
countries can be connected. This is
interconnection between countries.
through the movement of people
MNCs are playing a major role in
between countries. People usually
the globalisation process. More
move from one country to another in
and more goods and services,
search of better income, better jobs or
investments and technology are
better education. In the past few
moving between countries. Most
decades, however, there has not been
regions of the world are in closer
much increase in the movement of
people between countries due to
LET’S WORK THESE OUT various restrictions.
1. What is the role of MNCs in the globalisation process?
2. What are the various ways in which countries can be
linked?
3. Choose the correct option.
Globalisation, by connecting countries, shall result in
(a) lesser competition among producers.
(b) greater competition among producers.
(c) no change in competition among producers. ...WE’VE SEEN GREAT IMPROVEMENTS
IN TRANSPORTATION...
FACTORS THAT HAVE ENABLED GLOBALISATION
Technology
Rapid improvement in technology has been one major factor that has
stimulated the globalisation process. For instance, the past fifty years have
seen several improvements in transportation technology. This has made much
faster delivery of goods across long distances possible at lower costs.
Containers for
transport of goods
Goods are placed in containers
that can be loaded intact onto
ships, railways, planes and trucks.
Containers have led to huge
reduction in port handling costs
and increased the speed with
which exports can reach markets.
Similarly, the cost of air transport
has fallen. This has enabled much
greater volumes of goods being
transported by airlines.
6666622222 UUUUU EEEEE DDDDD
NNNNNDDDDDEEEEERRRRRSSSSSTTTTTAAAAANNNNNDDDDDIIIIINNNNNGGGGG CCCCCOOOOONNNNNOOOOOMMMMMIIIIICCCCC EEEEEVVVVVEEEEELLLLLOOOOOPPPPPMMMMMEEEEENNNNNTTTTT
Reprint 2026-27

Even more remarkable have been amazing world of internet, where you
the developments in information and can obtain and share information on
communication technology. In almost anything you want to know.
recent times, technology in the areas Internet also allows us to send instant
of telecommunications, computers, electronic mail (e-mail) and talk
Internet has been changing rapidly. (voice-mail) across the world at
Telecommunication facilities (tele- negligible costs.
graph, telephone including mobile
phones, fax) are used to contact one
another around the world, to access
information instantly, and to ...BUT WHERE
IS THE
communicate from remote areas. This
ELECTRICITY?...
has been facilitated by satellite
communication devices. As you
would be aware, computers have now
entered almost every field of activity.
You might have also ventured into the
In (f oo srr p m I rT aea cait n rdi oo is snn h sg a o con r ot ud u) t h nc po a trrm s io epm d sl u .au Lcyn ee ti tidc o ua a nt s i m o o sn efa e sjt oe e hrc r o h vr won ic .lo e el o i sngy GGGGGUUUUU lllllooooosssss bbbbbiiiiinnnnn aaaaaggggg llllliiiii sssssIIIII aaaaaTTTTT tt t ttiiiii iiiiinnn oonn ooonnnnn
A news magazine published for London
readers is to be designed and printed in
Delhi. The text of the magazine is sent
through Internet to the Delhi office. The
designers in the Delhi office get
orders on how to design the magazine
from the office in London using
telecommunication facilities. The
designing is done on a computer. After
printing, the magazines are sent by air
to London. Even the payment of money
for designing and printing from a bank
in London to a bank in Delhi is done
instantly through the Internet
(e-banking)!
LET’S WORK THESE OUT
1. In the above example, underline the
words describing the use of
technology in production.
IT LOOKS LIKE A VERY NICE
MAGAZINE. BUT WHY ISN’T MY 2. How is information technology
TEXTBOOK PRINTED LIKE NO, MY CHILD! THIS connected with globalisation? Would
THIS? I CAN HARDLY READ PRINTING PRESS IS NOT globalisation have been possible
THE WORDS IN MY BOOK! FOR ORDINARY INDIANS! without expansion of IT?
GGGGG IIIII EEEEE 6666633333
LLLLLOOOOOBBBBBAAAAALLLLLIIIIISSSSSAAAAATTTTTIIIIIOOOOONNNNN AAAAANNNNNDDDDD TTTTTHHHHHEEEEE NNNNNDDDDDIIIIIAAAAANNNNN CCCCCOOOOONNNNNOOOOOMMMMMYYYYY
Reprint 2026-27

Liberalisation of foreign trade machinery, fertilisers, petroleum
and foreign investment etc. Note that all developed
policy countries, during the early stages of
development, have given protection to
Let us return to the example of imports
domestic producers through a variety
of Chinese toys in India. Suppose the
of means.
Indian government puts a tax on
import of toys. What would happen? Starting around 1991, some far-
Those who wish to import these toys reaching changes in policy were made
would have to pay tax on this. Because in India. The government decided that
of the tax, buyers will have to pay a the time had come for Indian
higher price on imported toys. Chinese producers to compete with producers
toys will no longer be as cheap in the around the globe. It felt that
Indian markets and imports from competition would improve the
China will automatically reduce. performance of producers within the
Indian toy-makers will prosper. country since they would have to
improve their quality. This decision
Tax on imports is an example of
was supported by powerful
trade barrier. It is called a barrier
international organisations.
because some restriction has been set
up. Governments can use trade Thus, barriers on foreign trade and
barriers to increase or decrease foreign investment were removed to a
(regulate) foreign trade and to decide large extent. This meant that goods
what kinds of goods and how much could be imported and exported
of each, should come into the country. easily and also foreign companies
could set up factories and offices
The Indian government, after
here.
Independence, had put barriers to
foreign trade and foreign investment. Removing barriers or restrictions
This was considered necessary to set by the government is what is
protect the producers within the known as liberalisation. With
country from foreign competition. liberalisation of trade, businesses are
Industries were just coming up in the allowed to make decisions freely
1950s and 1960s, and competition about what they wish to import or
from imports at that stage would not export. The government imposes
have allowed these industries to come much less restrictions than before
up. Thus, India allowed imports and is therefore said to be more
of only essential items such as liberal.
LET’S WORK THESE OUT
1. What do you understand by liberalisation of foreign trade?
2. Tax on imports is one type of trade barrier. The government could also place a limit on
the number of goods that can be imported. This is known as quotas. Can you explain,
using the example of Chinese toys, how quotas can be used as trade barriers?
Do you think this should be used? Discuss.
6666644444 UUUUU EEEEE DDDDD
NNNNNDDDDDEEEEERRRRRSSSSSTTTTTAAAAANNNNNDDDDDIIIIINNNNNGGGGG CCCCCOOOOONNNNNOOOOOMMMMMIIIIICCCCC EEEEEVVVVVEEEEELLLLLOOOOOPPPPPMMMMMEEEEENNNNNTTTTT
Reprint 2026-27

WORLD TRADE ORGANISATION
We have seen that the liberalisation developed countries, WTO establishes
of foreign trade and investment in rules regarding international trade,
India was supported by some very and sees that these rules are obeyed.
powerful international organisations.
About 160 countries of the world are
These organisations say that all
currently members of the WTO.
barriers to foreign trade and
investment are harmful. There Though WTO is supposed to allow
should be no barriers. Trade free trade for all, in practice, it is seen
between countries should be ‘free’. that the developed countries have
All countries in the world should unfairly retained trade barriers. On
liberalise their policies. the other hand, WTO rules have forced
World Trade Organisation (WTO) is the developing countries to remove
one such organisation whose aim is trade barriers. An example of this is
to liberalise international trade. the current debate on trade in
Started at the initiative of the agricultural products.
DDDDDeeeeebbbbbaaaaattttteeeee ooooonnnnn TTTTTrrrrraaaaadddddeeeee PPPPPrrrrraaaaaccccctttttiiiiiccccceeeeesssss
You have seen in Chapter 2, that the Developing countries are, therefore, asking the
agriculture sector provides the bulk developed country governments, “We have
of employment and a significant reduced trade barriers as per WTO rules. But you
portion of the GDP in India. have ignored the rules of WTO and have
Compare this to a developed continued to pay your farmers vast sums of
country such as the US with the money. You have asked our governments to stop
share of agriculture in GDP at 1% supporting our farmers, but you are doing so
and its share in total employment yourselves. IIIIIsssss ttttthhhhhiiiiisssss fffffrrrrreeeeeeeeee aaaaannnnnddddd fffffaaaaaiiiiirrrrr tttttrrrrraaaaadddddeeeee?????”
a tiny 0.5%! And yet this very
small percentage of people
who are engaged in A typical cotton farm in USA consists of thousands of acres owned by
a huge corporation that will sell cotton abroad at lowered prices.
agriculture in the US receive
massive sums of money from
the US government for
production and for exports to
other countries. Due to this
massive money that they
receive, US farmers can sell
the farm products at
abnormally low prices. The
surplus farm products are
sold in other country markets
at low prices, adversely
affecting farmers in these
countries.
GGGGG IIIII EEEEE 6666655555
LLLLLOOOOOBBBBBAAAAALLLLLIIIIISSSSSAAAAATTTTTIIIIIOOOOONNNNN AAAAANNNNNDDDDD TTTTTHHHHHEEEEE NNNNNDDDDDIIIIIAAAAANNNNN CCCCCOOOOONNNNNOOOOOMMMMMYYYYY
Reprint 2026-27

LET’S WORK THESE OUT
1. Fill in the blanks.
WTO was started at the initiative of __________countries. The aim of the WTO is to
____________________. WTO establishes rules regarding ________________ for
all countries, and sees that ___________________ In practice, trade between countries
is not ______________________________. Developing countries like India have
___________________, whereas developed countries, in many cases, have continued
to provide protection to their producers.
2. What do you think can be done so that trade between countries is more fair?
3. In the above example, we saw that the US government gives massive sums of money
to farmers for production. At times, governments also give support to promote production
of certain types of goods, such as those which are environmentally friendly. Discuss
whether these are fair or not.
IMPACT OF GLOBALISATION IN INDIA
In the last twenty years, globalisation Among producers and workers,
of the Indian economy has come a the impact of globalisation has not
long way. What has been its effect on been uniform.
the lives of people? Let us look at
Firstly, MNCs have increased their
some of the evidence.
investments in India over the past 20
Globalisation and greater years, which means investing in India
competition among producers - both has been beneficial for them. MNCs
local and foreign producers - has been have been interested in industries
of advantage to consumers, such as cell phones, automobiles,
particularly the well-off sections in the electronics, soft drinks, fast food or
urban areas. There is greater choice services such as banking in urban
before these consumers who now areas. These products have a large
enjoy improved quality and lower number of well-off buyers. In these
prices for several products. As a result, industries and services, new jobs have
these people today, enjoy much been created. Also, local companies
higher standards of living than was supplying raw materials, etc. to these
possible earlier. industries have prospered.
Reprint 2026-27

SSSSSttttteeeeepppppsssss tttttooooo AAAAAttttttttttrrrrraaaaacccccttttt FFFFFooooorrrrreeeeeiiiiigggggnnnnn IIIIInnnnnvvvvveeeeessssstttttmmmmmeeeeennnnnttttt
In recent years, the central and state rights. In the recent years, the government
governments in India are taking special has allowed companies to ignore many of
steps to attract foreign companies to these. Instead of hiring workers on a
invest in India. Industrial zones, called regular basis, companies hire workers
Special Economic Zones (SEZs), are ‘flexibly’ for short periods when there is
being set up. SEZs are to have world class intense pressure of work. This is done to
facilities: electricity, water, roads, reduce the cost of labour for the company.
transport, storage, recreational and However, still not satisfied, foreign
educational facilities. Companies who set companies are demanding more flexibility
up production units in the SEZs do not in labour laws.
have to pay taxes for an initial period of
NOW, WE
five years. ARE READY
TO INVEST!
Government has also allowed
flexibility in the labour laws to attract
foreign investment. You have seen in
Chapter 2 that the companies in the
organised sector have to obey certain
rules that aim to protect the workers’
Secondly, several of the top Indian are some Indian companies which
companies have been able to benefit are spreading their operations
from the increased competition. They worldwide.
have invested in newer technology and
Globalisation has also created
production methods and raised their
new opportunities for companies
production standards. Some have
providing services, particularly those
gained from successful collaborations
involving IT. The Indian company
with foreign companies.
producing a magazine for the London
Moreover, globalisation has based company and call centres are
enabled some large Indian companies some examples. Besides, a host of
to emerge as multinationals services such as data entry, account-
themselves! Tata Motors (auto- ing, administrative tasks, engineering
mobiles), Infosys (IT), Ranbaxy are now being done cheaply in
(medicines), Asian Paints (paints), countries such as India and are
Sundaram Fasteners (nuts and bolts) exported to the developed countries.
LET’S WORK THESE OUT
1. How has competition benefited people in India?
2. Should more Indian companies emerge as MNCs? How would it benefit the people in
the country?
3. Why do governments try to attract more foreign investment?
4. In Chapter 1, we saw what may be development for one may be destructive for others.
The setting of SEZs has been opposed by some people in India. Find out who are
these people and why are they opposing it.
GGGGG IIIII EEEEE 6666677777
LLLLLOOOOOBBBBBAAAAALLLLLIIIIISSSSSAAAAATTTTTIIIIIOOOOONNNNN AAAAANNNNNDDDDD TTTTTHHHHHEEEEE NNNNNDDDDDIIIIIAAAAANNNNN CCCCCOOOOONNNNNOOOOOMMMMMYYYYY
Reprint 2026-27

Small producers: Compete or perish
For a large number of small producers and
workers globalisation has posed major
challenges.
RRRRRiiiiisssssiiiiinnnnnggggg CCCCCooooommmmmpppppeeeeetttttiiiiitttttiiiiiooooonnnnn
wpyteNiclot uR
no
rl
eo
o
of
a
e
b
a
oa
m
a
rcdH
ehfv
d
kn
ra
tp
uii
io
r
usls nc
a
iod
.f
s
g
,e
c
gr
n
nu
li
h
Co
tid
y
if ra
i
utm
c
h,e
a
os
n
n
p
ep
n,ac ho a drtr
an
t
t
o
os hi
ee
s
c
d
m
e
aw
rle
i
ii ei x
u
ns tn
n
he
v
aop
b
c
dd
d
iiri sie
msa
un au
n
s
c
in
s
ps
o
g
.t hs
t
akt
n
apt rru
c
ah
r
lii
ba
eiac a
et
da
a
loh
p
t
ll et
c
i
n
a
u
s
.t
h sa
c
2
c
o
st
t
e.e
i
w
tW
0e
a
ts
s
ooR dw rh
n
i
rta
ti
wso o hniv
ei
r
h
nu
in
cii ot
n
xn
i
l
l
d
s
rt
u
pmp To
t
k
1
d
he aah o
o
a
e9r rik na
mw
n
ni re9o v
d
segyi2nade
l
cipoacbHmi mu hfn
ro
cr
as
o
eta
ma
pc
tiw
h
re fl
vn
n
o
geu
p
ed
ie
rd
eu
rtad
m
i
t
v
ds
ef
ni et
t
ean
s
o
ob
di
br
f
ecg
,
oo
y
f
stb
i
uor
m
icuc pu
trc
go
ta
r
e
pe
ey
home
Mp
m
od
ot
a
p
pN
rm
d
c
t
lec
to
aC
w
ei ohi tf
f
apt
si
vf
e
l
ao
t
a
ie
s.ei
k
r
so
cr
It
Es ee
n
n
i
te
i
t
hvn
hn
od
l
Ri
ee
etn
f
r
at
i
ao
nr
sv
a
lo
v
,
pc ib
fn
m
a
iws
o
t
r
.u
hs
ii
tm
t
h
cl
o
hesek
t
een
yhp
e
el ne
m
e
o f
ow
vo pn
fsbs
ir
M
o
rse
o
le
tu
iii
mn Nt
h
cnt
oh lst
d
eeC
en
ges
.
mprwH
e e
ai
sh
rs
it
e
n
r
is
tin
sct cr
t
lu
i a io
eg
gt
n
ng
h
rs
tel
e
se
eo
,
mt no
t
hg
e
r
i n
eou
m
tvn
t
p
ee
a
oh
lr
t er
i ns
Wt
vsm
ic
s
Too
ie
O
ofm
n
n
c
ip
t
a n
ca
p
on
2ar
my
0ce
pi
0ms
t ao
1t oa
r n.
svr
iH
e
t
e
ae
sid
sd
s
,
aiw2cR
n
na
0a
o
dp
t0
rv
ha
ki
0
C
ec
inn
i
h
t
a
go
so
ew
n
ar nfs
od
m
n
rp
t
a
eh
hhr
i
o
a
ia m
b
hd
t
s
u
au
.h
s
vMc
e
o
i
ee
nn
ap
s
e
cl
nr
y
lo
sl
y
oe
d
s
s
s
os
u
es
f
iec
d
n
Rvet h
d
e a
tH
ha
n
vi
y
enn
i ’ idw s
rth
eh
fo
ua
r
re
r i
nal ekf
y
ib
n
teet sadh
ra
.dsse
r
Batteries, capacitors, plastics, toys, tyres, dairy products, and
vegetable oil are some examples of industries where the small
manufacturers have been hit hard due to competition. Several of
the units have shut down rendering many workers jobless. The
small and medium industries in India employ the largest number
of workers (11 crores) in the country, next only to agriculture.
LET’S WORK THESE OUT
1. What are the ways in which Ravi’s small production unit was affected by rising competition?
2. Should producers such as Ravi stop production because their cost of production is higher compared to
producers in other countries? What do you think?
3. Recent studies point out that small producers in India need three things to compete better in the market
(a) better roads, power, water, raw materials, marketing and information network (b) improvements and
modernisation of technology (c) timely availability of credit at reasonable interest rates.
l Can you explain how these three things would help Indian producers?
l Do you think MNCs will be interested in investing in these? Why?
l Do you think the government has a role in making these facilities available? Why?
l Can you think of any other step that the government could take? Discuss.
6666688888 UUUUU EEEEE DDDDD
NNNNNDDDDDEEEEERRRRRSSSSSTTTTTAAAAANNNNNDDDDDIIIIINNNNNGGGGG CCCCCOOOOONNNNNOOOOOMMMMMIIIIICCCCC EEEEEVVVVVEEEEELLLLLOOOOOPPPPPMMMMMEEEEENNNNNTTTTT
Reprint 2026-27

Competition and Uncertain Employment
Globalisation and the pressure of competition have substantially changed the lives
of workers. Faced with growing competition, most employers these days prefer to
employ workers ‘flexibly’. This means that workers’ jobs are no longer secure.
Let us see how the workers in the garment export industry
in India are having to bear this pressure of competition.
Factory workers folding garments for export. Though globalisation has created opportunities for paid work for
women, the condition of employment shows that women are denied their fair share of benefits.
Large MNCs in the garment industry in AAAAA GGGGGaaaaarrrrrmmmmmeeeeennnnnttttt WWWWWooooorrrrrkkkkkeeeeerrrrr
Europe and America order their products
35 year old Sushila has spent many
from Indian exporters. These large MNCs
years as a worker in garment export
with worldwide network look for the cheapest
industry of Delhi. She was employed
goods in order to maximise their profits. To
as a ‘permanent worker’ entitled to
get these large orders, Indian garment
health insurance, provident fund,
exporters try hard to cut their own costs. As
overtime at a double rate, when
cost of raw materials cannot be reduced,
Sushila’s factory closed in the late
exporters try to cut labour costs. Where
1990s. After searching for a job for
earlier a factory used to employ workers on
six months, she finally got a job 30
a permanent basis, now they employ workers
km. away from where she lives. Even
only on a temporary basis so that they do
after working in this factory for
not have to pay workers for the whole year.
several years, she is a temporary
Workers also have to put in very long
worker and earns less than half of
working hours and work night shifts on a
what she was earning earlier.
regular basis during the peak season. Wages
Sushila leaves her house every
are low and workers are forced to work
morning, seven days a week at 7:30
overtime to make both ends meet.
a.m. and returns at 10 p.m. A day
While this competition among the garment off from work means no wage. She
exporters has allowed the MNCs to make large has none of the benefits she used
profits, workers are denied their fair share of to get earlier. Factories closer to her
benefits brought about by globalisation. home have widely fluctuating orders
and therefore pay even less.
GGGGG IIIII EEEEE 6666699999
LLLLLOOOOOBBBBBAAAAALLLLLIIIIISSSSSAAAAATTTTTIIIIIOOOOONNNNN AAAAANNNNNDDDDD TTTTTHHHHHEEEEE NNNNNDDDDDIIIIIAAAAANNNNN CCCCCOOOOONNNNNOOOOOMMMMMYYYYY
Reprint 2026-27

The conditions of work and the hardships of the workers described above
have become common to many industrial units and services in India. Most
workers, today, are employed in the unorganised sector. Moreover, increasingly
conditions of work in the organised sector have come to resemble the
unorganised sector. Workers in the organised sector such as Sushila no longer
get the protection and benefits that they enjoyed earlier.
LET’S WORK THESE OUT
1. In what ways has competition affected workers, Indian exporters and foreign MNCs
in the garment industry?
2. What can be done by each of the following so that the workers can get a fair share
of benefits brought by globalisation?
(a) government
(b)employers at the exporting factories
(c)MNCs
(d)workers.
3. One of the present debates in India is whether companies should have flexible
policies for employment. Based on what you have read in the chapter, summarise
the point of view of the employers and workers.
THE STRUGGLE FOR A FAIR GLOBALISATION
The above evidence indicates that that labour laws are properly
not everyone has benefited from implemented and the workers get
globalisation. People with education, their rights. It can support small
skill and wealth have made the best producers to improve their
use of the new opportunities. On the performance till the time they become
other hand, there are many people strong enough to compete. If
who have not shared the benefits. necessary, the government can use
trade and investment barriers. It can
Since globalisation is now a
negotiate at the WTO for ‘fairer rules’.
reality, the question is how to
It can also align with other developing
make globalisation more ‘fair’?
countries with similar interests to
Fair globalisation would create
fight against the domination of
opportunities for all, and also ensure
developed countries in the WTO.
that the benefits of globalisation are
shared better.
In the past few years, massive
The government can play a major campaigns and representation by
role in making this possible. Its people’s organisations have
policies must protect the interests, not influenced important decisions
only of the rich and the powerful, but relating to trade and investments at
all the people in the country. You have the WTO. This has demonstrated
read about some of the possible steps that people also can play an
that the government can take. For important role in the struggle for fair
instance, the government can ensure globalisation.
7777700000 UUUUU EEEEE DDDDD
NNNNNDDDDDEEEEERRRRRSSSSSTTTTTAAAAANNNNNDDDDDIIIIINNNNNGGGGG CCCCCOOOOONNNNNOOOOOMMMMMIIIIICCCCC EEEEEVVVVVEEEEELLLLLOOOOOPPPPPMMMMMEEEEENNNNNTTTTT
Reprint 2026-27

A demonstration against WTO in Hong Kong, 2005
SUMMING UP
In this chapter, we looked at the investment has facilitated
present phase of globalisation. globalisation by removing
Globalisation is the process of barriers to trade and
rapid integration of countries. investment. At the inter-
This is happening through national level, WTO has put
greater foreign trade and foreign pressure on developing coun-
investment. MNCs are playing a tries to liberalise trade and
major role in the globalisation investment.
process. More and more MNCs
While globalisation has
are looking for locations around
benefited well-off consumers
the world that are cheap for their
and also producers with skill,
production. As a result,
education and wealth, many
production is being organised
small producers and workers
in complex ways.
have suffered as a result of the
Technology, particularly IT, rising competition. Fair
has played a big role in globalisation would create
organising production across opportunities for all, and also
countries. In addition, ensure that the benefits of
liberalisation of trade and globalisation are shared better.
GGGGG IIIII EEEEE 7777711111
LLLLLOOOOOBBBBBAAAAALLLLLIIIIISSSSSAAAAATTTTTIIIIIOOOOONNNNN AAAAANNNNNDDDDD TTTTTHHHHHEEEEE NNNNNDDDDDIIIIIAAAAANNNNN CCCCCOOOOONNNNNOOOOOMMMMMYYYYY
Reprint 2026-27

EXERCISES
1 What do you understand by globalisation? Explain in your own words.
2. What were the reasons for putting barriers to foreign trade and foreign investment by
the Indian government? Why did it wish to remove these barriers?
3. How would flexibility in labour laws help companies?
4. What are the various ways in which MNCs set up, control or produce in other countries?
5. Why do developed countries want developing countries to liberalise their trade and
investment? What do you think should the developing countries demand in return?
6. “The impact of globalisation has not been uniform.” Explain this statement.
7. How has liberalisation of trade and investment policies helped the globalisation
process?
8. How does foreign trade lead to integration of markets across countries? Explain
with an example other than those given here.
9. Globalisation will continue in the future. Can you imagine what the world would be
like twenty years from now? Give reasons for your answer.
10.Supposing you find two people arguing: One is saying globalisation has hurt our
country’s development. The other is telling, globalisation is helping India develop.
How would you respond to these arguments?
11.Fill in the blanks.
Indian buyers have a greater choice of goods than they did two decades back. This
is closely associated with the process of ______________. Markets in India are selling
goods produced in many other countries. This means there is increasing
______________ with other countries. Moreover, the rising number of brands that we
see in the markets might be produced by MNCs in India. MNCs are investing in India
because _____________ ___________________________________________ . While
consumers have more choices in the market, the effect of rising _______________
and ______________has meant greater _________________among the producers.
12.Match the following.
(i) MNCs buy at cheap rates from small (a) Automobiles
producers
(ii) Quotas and taxes on imports are used to (b) Garments, footwear, sports
regulate trade items
(iii)Indian companies who have invested abroad (c) Call centres
(iv)IT has helped in spreading of (d) Tata Motors, Infosys, Ranbaxy
production of services
(v) Several MNCs have invested in setting (e) Trade barriers
up factories in India for production
7777722222 UUUUU EEEEE DDDDD
NNNNNDDDDDEEEEERRRRRSSSSSTTTTTAAAAANNNNNDDDDDIIIIINNNNNGGGGG CCCCCOOOOONNNNNOOOOOMMMMMIIIIICCCCC EEEEEVVVVVEEEEELLLLLOOOOOPPPPPMMMMMEEEEENNNNNTTTTT
Reprint 2026-27

13.Choose the most appropriate option.
(i) The past two decades of globalisation has seen rapid movements in
(a) goods, services and people between countries.
(b) goods, services and investments between countries.
(c) goods, investments and people between countries.
(ii) The most common route for investments by MNCs in countries around the
world is to
(a)set up new factories.
(b)buy existing local companies.
(c)form partnerships with local companies.
(iii) Globalisation has led to improvement in living conditions
(a)of all the people
(b)of people in the developed countries
(c)of workers in the developing countries
(d)none of the above
ADDITIONAL ACTIVITY / PROJECT
I. Take some branded products that we use everyday (soaps, toothpaste,
garments, electronic goods, etc.). Check which of these are produced by MNCs.
II. Take any Indian industry or service of your choice. Collect information and
photographs from newspapers, magazine clippings, books, television, internet,
interviews with people on the following aspects of the industry.
(i) Various producers/companies in the industry
(ii) Is the product exported to other countries?
(iii) Are there MNCs among the producers?
(iv) Competition in the industry
(v) Conditions of work in the industry
(vi) Has there been any major change in the industry in the past 15 years?
(vii) Problems that people in the industry face.
GGGGG IIIII EEEEE 7777733333
LLLLLOOOOOBBBBBAAAAALLLLLIIIIISSSSSAAAAATTTTTIIIIIOOOOONNNNN AAAAANNNNNDDDDD TTTTTHHHHHEEEEE NNNNNDDDDDIIIIIAAAAANNNNN CCCCCOOOOONNNNNOOOOOMMMMMYYYYY
Reprint 2026-27

