Chapter
3 Tissues in Action
Life begins when a single cell divides itself several times to give
rise to a large number of cells. These cells gradually form the skin
(protection), muscles (movement), bones (support), nerves (control
Think It Over and coordination), and all other organs. This process is so intricate
that it is considered one of nature’s greatest engineering marvels.
y How is the study
Researchers have been trying to understand, replicate and modify this
of cells and tissues
process for human welfare. To do so, it is essential to understand the
significant for
understanding the natural biological processes that govern growth and development in
life processes and plants and animals. What makes cells group together to form tissues?
human welfare? Why do some tissues grow throughout life while others do not?
y How are tissues in In Chapter 2, Cell: The Building Block of Life, you have learnt that
plants and animals the cell is the basic unit of life. Many cells come together to form a
different, and why?
multicellular organism. In all multicellular organisms, there is a
y How is the hierarchy of organisation. Cells of similar type performing similar
division of labour
function group together to form a tissue, more than one type of tissues
at various levels
form organs, different organs form organ systems and organ systems
of organisation
form an organism. In unicellular organisms, such as amoeba, a single
in multicellular
cell performs all functions of life. In multicellular organisms like plants
organisms
and animals, different groups of cells perform different functions. A
correlated with
their structure and tissue is a group of cells (similar in structure) that work together to
function? perform a specific function. The formation of different types of tissues
leads to the division of labour, which increases the efficiency of the
body and enables it to carry out complex life processes. For example,
CChhaapptteerr--0033..iinndddd 2288 0033--0044--22002266 2200::0066::5577

Tissues in Action 29
in animals, muscle tissue enables movement and nervous tissue carries
messages to different parts of the body. In plants, conducting tissues, such as
xylem transports water and minerals, while phloem transports food.
3.1 Why are Plant and Animal Tissues Different?
In Chapter 2, Cell: The Building Block of Life, you compared plant
Meet a Scientist
and animal cells, and studied the major differences between them.
Most plants are fixed in one place and do not move from place to B. G. L.
place like animals. They need support to stay firm and upright. Swamy was
Plant cells have a cell wall that provides rigidity and strength. In a renowned
Indian
general, animals can move (although some, such as sponges, are
botanist
immobile). Without a rigid cell wall, animal cells can change shape
known
easily. This cellular flexibility eventually helps make their bodies
for his
suitable for locomotion.
contributions to the area
Another major difference between plants and animals is their of plant morphology and
mode of nutrition. Animals have tissues that help them digest anatomy. His book,
food obtained from different food sources, while plants have Hasuru Honnu, is a
popular book in
tissues that help them utilise solar energy for synthesising the
Kannada language. It is
food components through photosynthesis. Plants and animals
a blend of science, satire
have distinct tissues for transporting food and water to different
and culture. The book
parts of the body. The growth patterns in plants and animals also
describes the botanical
vary because the tissues responsible for growth differ in structure
excursion in the forests
and function. In this chapter, we will learn how the structures of of Western Ghats and
plant and animal tissues relate to their specific functions. is a treasure of plant
descriptions, utilisation,
3.2 Tissues for Growth in Plants conservation practices,
botanical folklores and
You must have observed that a small seedling grows into a tall
myths. The book won the
tree, roots grow deep into the soil, stems become thicker with
Kendra Sahitya Akademi
time and grass grows again after being eaten by grazing animals.
Award in 1978.
Which tissues are responsible for these changes?
Plants grow in different ways —
y increase in length (height of stem and depth of roots),
y increase in girth (thickness of stem), and
y regrowth after cutting the branches or grazing by animals.
This growth require actively dividing cells that together form a tissue
called a meristematic tissue.
Let us explore different kinds of meristematic tissues.
3.2.1. Apical meristem — How do plants grow in length?
Let us study the growth of roots in an onion bulb.
(a) Jar A (b) Jar B
Activity 3.1: Let us design experiments
Fig. 3.1: Experimental
1. Take two glass jars or couplin jars and fill them with water. set-up to observe the
growth of roots
2. Now, take two onion bulbs and place one in each jar, as shown in Fig. 3.1.
3. Observe the growth of roots in both bulbs for a few days.
4. Measure the length of roots on days 1, 2 and 3.
5. On day 3, cut the root tips of the onion bulb in Jar B by about 1 cm. After
this, observe the growth of roots in both the jars, measure their lengths
CChhaapptteerr--0033..iinndddd 2299 0033--0044--22002266 2200::0066::5599

for four more days (day 4 onwards), and record your observations in
Table 3.1.
Table 3.1: Experimental data
Length of onion root (cm) from the base of the bulb
Experimental
Jars
Day 1 Day 2 Day 3 Day 4 Day 5 Day 6 Day 7
A
B
What trend do you observe in
the data you recorded in Table 3.1?
Are your observations similar to
those presented in the graphical
representation (Fig. 3.2)? What do
you infer?
y Roots in Jar A continue to grow in
length.
y Roots in Jar B stop growing after
the tips are cut.
This shows that roots grow only
from their tips. The tips consist of
cells which divide continuously.
You may recall observing mitosis
in onion root tips in Chapter 2, Cell:
The Building Block of Life. This
observation confirms that root
tips contain actively dividing cells.
Days
Similarly, shoot tips also contain
Fig. 3.2: Growth of onion roots actively dividing cells that help the
shoots to grow in length. Thus, we conclude that plants have growth zones
at the tips of their roots and shoots, called the apical meristems, which
help the plants grow in length (Fig. 3.3).
3.2.2 Lateral meristem — How do plants grow in girth?
Look at your surroundings. You must have observed that the stems of dicot
Shoot apical
meristem plants not only grow in length but also increase in diameter or girth over
time. What causes this increase in girth? One possible explanation may be
the activity of meristematic tissues. If you have visited
a timber yard or observed the cut trunk of a tree, you
Root
may have noticed several ring-like patterns on the
apical
cut surface of the wood (Fig. 3.4). These are annual
meristem
growth rings. Some annual rings are wide and some
are narrow, reflecting the favourable or unfavourable
growth conditions during a particular year. By
Fig. 3.3: Location of Fig. 3.4: T.S. of a tree counting these annual rings, scientists can estimate
apical meristem in a trunk showing annual
the age of a tree and also understand the climatic
sapling growth rings
conditions under which it grew.
30 Exploration|Grade 9
morf
)mc(
stoor
fo
htgneL
blub
eht
fo
esab
eht
6.0
Jar A
5.5
Jar B
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
CChhaapptteerr--0033..iinndddd 3300 0044--0044--22002266 1177::5566::4455

Tissues in Action 31
The increase in girth occurs due to the presence of actively dividing New
branch
cells arranged in a ring in the stem. These cells divide and produce new
cells inside and outside in a concentric manner, leading to an increase in
diameter of stem. This meristematic tissue is called the lateral meristem.
New
3.2.3 Intercalary meristem — How do plants grow after
branch
being cut?
We have learnt that meristematic tissues are present at the tips of roots
and shoots. What do you think happens to the growth of the plant if the tip
of a young stem is cut? The stem stops growing in length but new branches
arise from the the nodes of stem (Fig. 3.5). The intercalary meristem is
located at the base of internode or just above the node. The node is point
Fig. 3.5: New branches
on plant stem where branches or leaves arise. The part of stem between
arising from the node
the two nodes is called internode. You may also have observed that when of a stem
the hedge around a garden is cut, after sometime more branches appear
again, giving the hedge a bushy appearance. Grass also appear after
sometime being mowed (Fig. 3.6) and/or grazed by animals. This happens
because of the presence of intercalary meristem at the nodes of its stem.
These meristematic tissues are called intercalary meristems.
Thus, plants have three types of meristematic tissues — apical, lateral
and intercalary. The apical meristem, located at the root and shoot tips,
increases its length. The lateral meristem located along the circumference
of stems increases girth. The intercalary meristem located at the base
of certain plants, such as grasses, helps them regenerate after cutting.
Together, these meristems account for growth in length, girth and
branching in plants. Fig. 3.6: Lawn mowing
The cells of the meristematic tissues are small, have thin cell walls, a
large and prominent nucleus, and dense cytoplasm with many organelles.
Vacuoles are generally absent and the cells are tightly packed with little or
no intercellular space. These characteristics of meristematic tissue allow
them continuous and rapid cell division. Why do you think that the cell of
meristematic tissues lack vacuoles?
Due to continuous cell division, meristematic tissue adds new cells to
the plant body. Some of the newly formed cells remain meristematic while
others lose the ability to divide. The cells that loose the ability to divide
undergo changes in structure and function, and become permanent
tissues. These cells become specialised to perform specific functions,
such as support, transport or storage. This process, by which meristematic
tissue becomes specialised to perform specific functions, is called
differentiation. Meristemetic tissue becomes permanent by the process
of differentiation.
3.2.4 Permanent tissues
Examine the Transverse Section(s) (T.S.) of the root and/or stem, and/
or the Vertical Section (V.S.) of the leaf of any herbaceous plant under a
microscope. The internal structure of a T.S. of a sunflower stem as seen
under a microscope is shown in Fig. 3.7. What do you observe? Are all the
cells similar in shape and size? How many different types of tissues can
you identify? What differences do you notice among them? What might be
CChhaapptteerr--0033..iinndddd 3311 0033--0044--22002266 2200::0077::0066

Epidermal hair
Epidermis Collenchyma
might be the reason for the presence of
Cuticle Parenchyma different types of cells and tissues? You can
see that different groups of cells are present
Sclerenchyma
in the T.S. of sunflower stem and each tissue
Phloem is specialised to perform a specific function.
Lateral meristem These are permanent tissues. Permanent
tissues can be simple (composed of only one
Xylem
type of cell) or complex (composed of more
than one types of cells).
Observe the types of tissues given in Fig. 3.7
based on pointers provided as follows:
(i) Protective tissue — Epidermis
Ground tissue What protects plants from mechanical injury,
water loss, harmful microorganisms and
Sunflower
extreme environmental conditions?
(Helianthus annuus)
The epidermis forms the outermost
layer of the plant body. It consists of a tightly
packed, single layer of flat and rectangular
cells. It protects all parts of the plants. These
cells are covered with a waxy layer of cutin
Vascular
tissue
called cuticle. In some plants, living in very
Stem
dry habitat, the epidemis may be covered
T.S. of the stem
by a thick layer of cuticle to reduce the
Fig. 3.7: Internal structure of a sunflower stem
water loss in the process of transpiration by
stomata. The cuticle also provides protection against mechenical injury
Thin walls
and invasion by prasites. In many plants, hair-like projections arise from
epidermal cells. In roots, these projections are called root hair, which
increase the surface area for absorption of water and minerals from
the soil. In leaves, the epidermis contains pores called stomata, which
apart from gaseous exchange helps in transpiration, i.e., evaporation
of water vapours through stomata. Thus, transpiration helps in water
(a) Parenchyma
transportation by creating a transpiration pull in xylem. Transpiration
Thick walls also helps in elimination of wastes from the plant body.
(ii) Supporting tissue — Simple permanent tissues
What keeps a plant upright? Why does a fresh twig bend but a dry twig
break? Why are seed coats hard and how do aquatic plants float? These
functions are carried out by supporting tissues. There are three types of
supporting tissues or simple permanent tissues — parenchyma, collenchyma
(b) Collenchyma and sclerenchyma. Each differs in structure and performs supporting functions.
Thick lignified walls a. Parenchyma
Parenchyma consists of living cells with thin walls (Fig. 3.8a). These cells are
loosely packed with intercellular spaces. Parenchyma mainly stores food
but also performs photosynthesis in the green parts of the plants. In aquatic
plants, specialised parenchyma forms air spaces, which help them float.
b. Collenchyma
(c) Sclerenchyma
Collenchyma consists of living cells with unevenly thickened corners due
Fig. 3.8: Various types of
to pectin (a chemical that gives flexibility like rubber) deposition (Fig. 3.8b).
simple permanent tissues
32 Exploration|Grade 9
eussit
dnuorG
CChhaapptteerr--0033..iinndddd 3322 2288--0044--22002266 1144::4433::2200

Tissues in Action 33
This tissue provides support and flexibility, allowing
Pause and Ponder
parts of the plant like stems and tendrils to bend without
breaking.
1. Y ou may have noticed that
fibres of coconut husk are hard
c. Sclerenchyma
and brittle, whereas the leaf
Sclerenchyma cells have thick walls (Fig. 3.8c) due to
stalks of coriander are soft and
deposition of lignin, making them hard and strong (forms
flexible. Find out the reason.
the woody structure). Most of these cells are dead. This
tissue is found in stems, leaf veins, and hard coverings of
seeds and nuts, such as coconut husk and walnut shell.
(iii) Conducting tissues — Complex permanent tissues Xylem fibre
How does water reach the leaves of tall trees? How does
food prepared in leaves reach other parts of the plant?
Tracheid
Plants have specialised conducting tissues called xylem
Xylem
and phloem, together known as complex permanent
parenchyma
tissues, because they are made up of different types of
Vessel
cells working together. Xylem (Fig. 3.9a) is the tissue that
transports water and minerals from the roots to other parts
of the plant. It also provides strength to the plant. Xylem (a)
consists of tracheids, vessels, xylem parenchyma and xylem
Phloem
fibres. Tracheids and vessels are tubular and thick-walled. parenchyma
Xylem parenchyma are the only living component of
xylem while trachieds, vessels, and xylem fibres are
Sieve tube
primarily sclerenchymatous. Unlike the xylem, phloem is
mostly made up of living cells (Fig. 3.9b). It consists of sieve Sieve
tubes, companion cells, phloem parenchyma and phloem pore
fibres. Some cells are long and tubular, joined end to end
by perforated walls. These cells form sieve tubes. Sieve Companion
tubes transport food from leaves to other parts of the plant. cell
The cellular functions of the sieve tube cells are regulated
by companion cells. Companion cells are specialised (b)
parenchyma cells. Main function of companion cells is to Fig. 3.9: Vascular tissue: (a) xylem, and
(b) phloem
monitor loading and unloading of sugars in sieve tubes.
Phloem parenchyma store food materials,
Xylem
and resin, tannins and latex. The sieve tubes
are also supported by phloem fibres which
are primarily schlerenchymatous and Phloem Epidermal
tissue
provide strength.
Ground tissue
So far, we have studied different
types of plant tissues based on their
Epidermal
functions — protection, support and tissue Phloem
conduction. In a plant body, these tissues do
not work alone. They are organised together Xylem
into larger groups called tissue systems. Epidermal
tissue
Plant tissues are organised into three Ground
tissue
tissue systems (Fig. 3.10) —
1. Dermal tissue system: This forms the
outer covering of the plant. It protects Xylem Phloem
the inner parts and reduces water loss.
Fig. 3.10: Tissue systems in plants
CChhaapptteerr--0033..iinndddd 3333 0044--0044--22002266 1177::5577::0000

Meet the Scientists 2. Ground tissue system: This forms the main body of
a plant between the dermal and conducting tissues. It
includes parenchyma, collenchyma and sclerenchyma.
3. Vascular tissue system: This consists of conducting
tissues — xylem and phloem.
Pause and Ponder
2. Why do you think that a thick cuticle on the outer wall of
Sipra Guha Mukherjee in
epidermis is advantageous for a plant living in the desert
collaboration with
but disadvantageous for a plant living underwater?
S. C. Maheshwari made a
breakthrough discovery in the 3. Once water is absorbed by plant roots, it has to travel
area of plant tissue culture. against gravity through xylem. How do the ‘dead’ cells of
Their research led to the the xylem work together with the living cells of leaves at
development of a complete the top to keep the water moving?
plant through anther culture, 4. What do you think will happen if there were no stomata
using an artificial nutrient in the epidermis of the stem or leaves?
medium under controlled
laboratory conditions.
This pioneering work
3.3 Animal Tissues
greatly contributed to crop
improvement and brought Like plants, animal cells also group together and specialised
significant progress in modern
in performing different functions. These groups of similar
agriculture.
cells form animal tissues. Let us perform a few simple
activities —
y Blink your eyes quickly.
y Clench and open your fist.
y Take a deep breath.
y Touch something warm or cold.
Ready to Go Beyond Now think, which tissue helps you move? Which tissue
enables you to sense heat or cold? Which tissue allows
In young plants, the
oxygen to enter the blood? Which tissue holds the body
outer protective layer is a
single-layered epidermis. together so that the skin does not fall off?
As plants grow older, some Many such questions can be asked but the answers
cells below the epidermis of lie in the diversity of animal tissues, which are specially
the stem develop the ability
adapted to perform different functions. It is interesting to
to divide, act as lateral
understand how the structure of an animal tissue suits its
meristematic cells and form
specific function.
the cork cambium. The
division of cork cambium Let us explore different kinds of animal tissues. Each
cells gives rise to cork cells. tissue performs a specific function.
Cork cells are dead, compactly
arranged, and contain a 3.3.1 Epithelial tissues — Structure and
substance which makes them functions
impermeable to water and
Epithelial tissue forms the outer covering of the body
gases. This forms the bark of
(skin) and also lines the internal organs, such as the
the tree.
mouth, lungs, blood vessels and intestine. It is composed
of closely packed cells with very little space between them.
This structure prevents the entry of the germs, reduces
34 Exploration|Grade 9
CChhaapptteerr--0033..iinndddd 3344 0044--0044--22002266 1177::5577::2244

Tissues in Action 35
water loss, and also helps in the absorption, secretion and movement of
substances. Different types of epithelial tissues are structurally adapted
to perform different functions (Table 3.2).
Study Table 3.2 along with the corresponding diagrams shown in Fig. 3.11
to understand how structure and function of epithelial tissues are related.
Table 3.2: Characteristics of functionally and structurally different
epithelial tissues
Function Structure Location in the body
Exchange: Helps in rapid Single layer of thin, flat cells (Fig. Lining of the tissue in
diffusion of liquids and 3.11a) the blood vessels and
gases lungs
Protection: Protects Many layers of cells; the outer Skin, mouth and
underlying tissues from cells are flat and tightly packed oesophagus
mechanical injury, friction (Fig. 3.11b)
and entry of microbes
Secretion: Production Cells specialised for producing Salivary glands, sweat
and secretion of mucus, and releasing substances; may glands and stomach
enzymes, hormones, sweat be cuboidal or columnar lining
saliva (Fig. 3.11c)
Sensory functions: Smell, Specialised receptor cells having Nostrils, taste buds
taste, sound and balance hair like cilia (Fig. 3.11d) and inner ear
Absorption: Efficient Single layer of tall, pillar- Lining of small
uptake of nutrients, water, like cells, often with hair-like intestine
etc. structure (Fig. 3.11e)
3.3.2 How are various parts
connected in our body?
You have read that blood connects
(a)
different parts of the body by transporting
nutrients, gases, hormones, etc.
Grade 7 (d)
In the same way, bones connect Curiosity
Chapter 9
and support the body from head
to toe. A tissue that connects and supports
other tissues is called a connective tissue.
(b)
Both blood and bones are connective
tissues. Though both are connective
tissues, they differ in composition and
consistency. Blood is fluid, while bone is (e)
hard. This difference is due to the matrix,
which is watery, soft and jelly-like in
(c)
blood but hard, solid, and rigid in bones
(Fig. 3.12a). Fig. 3.11: Types of epithelial tissues in
different parts of the body
CChhaapptteerr--0033..iinndddd 3355 0033--0044--22002266 2200::0077::1177

Activity 3.2: Let us understand further
y Recall everyday experiences given in the first column of Table 3.3.
y Write your observations and questions in your notebook.
y Compare your observations with the observations given in Table 3.3.
Table 3.3: Your experiences, observations and questions from daily life
Experiences Observations Questions
When you get a small Red blood oozes out from the cut. What causes
cut on your skin A clot is formed after some time. blood to clot?
When you get a skin The area turns red and perhaps
infection slightly swollen. You may have a fever.
When you exercise You breathe faster. Your face may
or run turn red.
The everyday experiences mentioned above are related to blood and its
components.
1. The red colour of blood is due to haemoglobin, an iron-rich protein
in the Red Blood Cells (RBCs). RBCs live for about 4 months and are
replaced regularly.
2. Platelets help in blood clotting at the site of the injury.
3. During exercise or running, muscles need more oxygen, so breathing
becomes faster and blood flow increases (face appears red).
4. White Blood Cells (WBCs) collect at infected areas, causing pus
formation and inflammation (causing redness and swelling, and
possible pus formation at the infected area).
Collar bone
WBC
Plasma
(55% of total Tendon
volume)
Long bone
Cartilage
Formed Platelets
elements
Kneecap Ligament
(45% of total
volume)
RBCs
(a) Components of blood (b) Types of bones (c) Arrangement of
tissues at a joint
Fig. 3.12: Types of connective tissues
36 Exploration|Grade 9
CChhaapptteerr--0033..iinndddd 3366 0033--0044--22002266 2200::0077::2200

Tissues in Action 37
Functions of other connective tissues as experienced through
different actions.
Activity 3.3: Let us perform
1. Perform the actions given in Table 3.4.
2. Record your experiences and compare them with the experiences
given in Table 3.4.
3. Study their functions and identify the connective tissues (Fig. 3.12).
Table 3.4: Connective tissues
Identified
Action Experience Function
connective tissue
Touch your A hard and rigid Gives strength, Bone
elbow gently structure support and (Fig. 3.12b)
protection
Press and fold A soft and flexible Provides flexibility Cartilage
your ear or structure that and cushions the (Fig. 3.12c)
gently press your retains shape ends of bones for
nose and stop again shock absorption
Touch your Feel movement in Connects muscle Tendon
forearm muscles the forearm even to bone, and thus, (Fig. 3.12c)
and wiggle your though fingers are brings about
fingers far away movement
Sit on a chair and The joint does not Connects bone to Ligament
move your leg go beyond a limit bone and provides (Fig. 3.12c)
upwards till your stability, limits
knee allows movement, and
helps prevent
dislocation
Bones have a rigid matrix containing calcium and phosphorus
compounds, giving them strength and rigidity. In contrast, cartilage has
a soft, jelly-like matrix, and provides flexibility and cushioning. Other
connective tissues include tendons and ligaments. Tendons connect
muscles to bones, while ligaments connect bones to bones and prevent
excessive movement (Fig. 3.12c).
3.3.3 Can we control movement in our body?
Some movements are under our conscious control, such as running, writing
or lifting objects. These are called voluntary movements and are carried
out by skeletal muscles (Fig. 3.13), which are attached to the skeleton. They
are made up of bundles of long, cylindrical cells called muscle fibres,
which are unbranched, multinucleate (having many nuclei) and striated
(showing light and dark bands).
Are there involuntary movements in the body? Yes, many body
movements occur automatically without conscious control, for example
the movement of food in the intestine and the beating of the heart. These
are called involuntary movements. The muscles responsible for these
CChhaapptteerr--0033..iinndddd 3377 0044--0044--22002266 1188::0088::5511

movements include smooth muscles (Fig. 3.13), which are
found in organs like the stomach and intestines. Their cells
are spindle-shaped, have a single nucleus and lack striations.
They help in slow, continuous movements like digestion.
Skeletal muscle
The cardiac muscles (Fig. 3.13) are found only in the
heart. Their fibres are cylindrical and branched with a
single nucleus, and have faint striations. Cardiac muscles
work tirelessly and rhythmically, enabling the heart to beat
throughout life without fatigue.
Smooth muscle
3.3.4 How does the body sense, communicate and
respond?
Have you noticed how quickly you pull your hand away
from something hot, or how you remember the lyrics of
Cardiac muscle a song learned long ago? These actions are controlled
Fig. 3.13: Different types of muscles by nervous tissue, which forms the body’s control and
coordination network. The brain acts as the control centre;
coordinating activities, memory and responses across the
Cell body body. Muscles, both voluntary and involuntary, cannot
function independently. They receive instructions from
Nucleus
the nervous tissue. For example, during exercise, the brain
signals the heart to beat faster to meet the body’s increased
Axon
terminals oxygen demand.
Axon
The cells of nervous tissue are called neurons (Fig. 3.14)
or nerve cells, which are specialised to receive, process and
transmit messages. Each neuron has three main parts — the
Dendrites
cell body, which contains the nucleus and controls cell
Fig. 3.14: Structure of a neuron
activities; dendrites, which receive signals from other
neurons; and an axon, a long fibre that carries messages
from the cell and ends at axon terminals. The axon terminals
transmit the messages to other cells.
Cartilage
3.4 The Musculoskeletal System
The musculoskeletal system (Fig. 3.15) is made up of
Bones bones, muscles, joints, cartilage, tendons and ligaments.
Muscles
This system helps us stand upright, move, maintain posture
Joint
and protect delicate organs. The musculoskeletal system
functions under the control of the nervous system. Muscles
pull on bones to produce movement. They are attached to
bones by strong, flexible bands called tendons (Fig. 3.15).
When a muscle contracts, the tendon transmits this force
to the bone, resulting in movement at a joint. Have you
Tendon
wondered how much of your body weight comes from
bones? On an average, the adult human skeleton makes up
about 12 – 15 per cent of body weight, though this can vary
Ligament
with age, gender and body composition.
Fig. 3.15: Musculoskeletal
system in human body
38 Exploration|Grade 9
CChhaapptteerr--0033..iinndddd 3388 0033--0044--22002266 2200::0077::2222

Tissues in Action 39
Activity 3.4: Let us investigate
What percentage of total body weight comes from bones and muscles?
1. Step on a weighing scale and record your total body weight.
2. Use online references or health resources to find average bone and
muscle mass percentage for your age, gender, and an Indian body type
(these may vary by ethnicity). For example, on average, adult males
have about 40 – 50 per cent muscle, and adult females have ~30 – 40 per
cent muscle, although bone mass is about 12 – 15 per cent for all adults.
3. Multiply your total body weight by the bone percentage and muscle
percentage to estimate the weight of your bones and muscles.
4. Record the estimated bone weight and muscle weight, and compare
them with your total body weight.
5. Compare your findings with those of your classmates and calculate the
class average.
Discuss why do bone and muscle mass differ between individuals, and
how do they contribute to the overall body weight?
3.4.1 The musculoskeletal system in action
Activity 3.5: Let us observe
Move different parts of your body and observe what movement(s) it can
make.
Table 3.5: Different types of movements our body can make
Body Complete Partial Turning, side-raising,
Bending
parts rotation rotation up-down or any other movement
Elbow No No Yes
Shoulder
Knee
Neck
Fingers
Toes
Wrist
You may have noticed that some parts of our body can move easily in
many directions, while others move only in a single direction. Why does
this happen? The difference is due to the types of joints present. A joint is
a junction between two or more bones. Joints allow movement but they
cannot move the bones on their own. So, what actually causes the bones to
move?
CChhaapptteerr--0033..iinndddd 3399 0033--0044--22002266 2200::0077::2222

3.5 Types of Joints
3.5.1 Ball and socket joint
Fixed joint Pivot joint The shoulder joint allows free movement of the arm
(Table 3.5). This is because the rounded top of the upper
arm bone fits into a shallow hollow of the shoulder bone,
forming the ball and socket joint (Fig. 3.16). Together
with the collarbone, the shoulder forms the shoulder
girdle, which connects the arm to the skeleton. This
joint allows forward, backwards, sideways and circular
Ball and socket movements.
joints
3.5.2 Hinge joint
Hinge joints Unlike the shoulder, the elbow bends and straightens
in one direction only like a door hinge (Table 3.5). This
type of joint is called a hinge joint. A similar hinge joint
is present in the knee, where a small bone called the
Fig. 3.16: Types of joints kneecap protects the joint.
3.5.3 Pivot joint
Now, try shaking your head ‘no.’ Place your hand at the
back of your neck and feel the gentle movement. How
Ready to Go Beyond
does the neck move so freely? The skull is connected to
Stem cells in the bone marrow the backbone through a pivot joint, which allows the
are special cells that can divide head to move side to side like a doorknob turning in
and make new cells. In a bone
its socket.
marrow transplant, stem cells
from a healthy person are given to 3.5.4 Fixed joints
patients who have blood cancers
The skull is a hard case of flat bones joined together to
like Leukemia or disorders, such
protect the brain, eyes and ears. The bones of the skull
as Thalassemia.
are connected by fixed joints, which means the bones
of the skull cannot move. This keeps the brain safe even
when the body moves.
Pause and Ponder
5. Look at the picture given below (Fig. 3.17). Carefully observe the various poses of classical
and folk dances of India. Can you identify which joints are involved? Also, what type of
movement each joint allows?
Fig. 3.17: Poses of classical and folk dances of India
40 Exploration|Grade 9
CChhaapptteerr--0033..iinndddd 4400 0033--0044--22002266 2200::0077::2255

Tissues in Action 41
3.6 Skeletal System
The skeletal system consists of a framework of bones that provides strength
and protects delicate internal organs. It includes the skull, vertebral column
and rib cage. From the base of the skull, it extends a flexible column called
the backbone or vertebral column (spine), made up of a series of small
bones called vertebrae. It supports the body and helps us stand upright.
Between each vertebra is a cartilage disc, which acts as a cushion and
allows flexibility, so we can bend and twist without injuring the internal
spinal cord.
Can you feel the bones under your chest? These are your ribs. You have
12 pairs of ribs and together they form the rib cage. The rib cage acts like a
protective cage to protect vital organs, such as the heart and lungs. But you
may wonder, “How can such a strong cage move? And why does it need to
move?”. The ribs are attached to the spine at the back and to the breast bone
(sternum) in the front. They are joined by flexible cartilage. This flexibility
allows the rib cage to expand and contract during breathing. This movement
increases and decreases space in the chest, allowing air to move in and out
of the lungs. Injury to the ribs can make breathing painful and difficult.
Bridging Science and Society
Yoga, described in ancient Indian texts includes physical postures, breathing
and meditation. Research shows it improves flexibility, posture and breathing,
reduces stress, and helps prevent lifestyle diseases. Every year, 21st June is
observed as the International Yoga Day to promote role of Yoga in health and
well-being.
Maintaining correct posture, proper nutrition, regular exercise and yoga
keeps our bones strong, muscles fit, joints flexible, and protects the body
from stiffness.
1
12 2
3
11
4
10
9 5
8 6
7
Fig. 3.18: Poses of Surya Namaskar
CChhaapptteerr--0033..iinndddd 4411 0033--0044--22002266 2200::0077::3300

Think as a Scientist
From one cell to an organism: Totipotency
In 1958, F. C. Steward demonstrated that even single cells from vascular
phloem of carrot retain the ability to regenerate whole plants. He was the first
person to do so!
He and his team conducted an experiment using the phloem cells of
carrot. He grew these cells in a nutrient medium containing simple sugars and
hormones under appropriate conditions. He observed that these phloem cells
divided to form a mass of cells, which gradually divided and differentiated
into a complete plant.
It shows that cells of phloem first dedifferentiated (cells regain the ability to divide) to
form an undifferentiated mass of unspecialised cells. These, when grown in appropriate
conditions, supplemented
with nutrients and growth Cross section
chemicals, further divided of carrot root
and redifferentiated to
form roots, shoot, and
eventually the complete 2-mg
plant. Thus, some mature fragments
plant cells have the ability
to undifferentiate, divide
and redifferentiate to
develop into a new plant Fragments Single cells Embryonic Plantlet was Adult
under specific conditions. were cultured free in plant cultured plant
This is known as in nutrient suspension developed on agar
totipotency and such cells medium; began to from a medium,
stirring caused divide cultured and later
are totipotent cells. This is
single cells to single cell planted in
similar to the ability of a
shear off into soil
zygote to divide and
the liquid
differentiate into an Fig. 3.19: Regeneration of a carrot plant
entire organism.
In his experiment on phloem cells of carrot, F. C. Steward used different combinations of
nutrients and other factors, and obtained the following results.
Table 3.6: Effect of light, air and nutrient medium on growth of the cultured plant cells
Conditions Composition of nutrient Increase in fresh weight (mg) of
medium the cells from intial weight
Light Air
  Solid medium + nutrients reduced
  Liquid medium + nutrients 20% increased
  Liquid medium + nutrients reduced
Based upon Table 3.6, think about these questions:
(a) What do you conclude about the characteristics of phloem cells of carrot?
(b) In which of the three combinations would you obtain the highest and lowest biomass?
What could be the possible reason(s) for this observation?
(c) Will you get the same results if you culture animal cells instead of carrot cells?
(d) Think and mention any two commercial applications of the study above.
42 Exploration|Grade 9
CChhaapptteerr--0033..iinndddd 4422 2288--0044--22002266 1144::4444::3311

Tissues in Action 43
Bridging Science and Society
In nature, plant pathologists have observed a disease in plants called crown
gall disease (Fig. 3.20). In this disease, tumour-like swellings develop on the
stems due to rapid and uncontrolled cell division. The disease is caused by
a bacterium called Agrobacterium tumefaciens.
Instead of only trying to cure this disease, scientists studied how a
bacterium transfers its genetic material into plant cells. This knowledge
was later used in plant tissue culture and genetic engineering. Today,
Agrobacterium is used as a tool to introduce useful genes into plants Fig. 3.20: Crown
for the production of valuable phytochemicals, improved crops and gall disease
disease-resistant varieties.
At a Glance
y Tissues are groups of similar cells that work together to perform
specific functions.
y Different tissues coordinate with one another to perform life
processes in plants and animals.
y Plant tissues are broadly classified into meristematic and
permanent tissues, depending on their ability to divide.
y Functionally, plant tissues can be categorised as protecting tissue,
supporting tissue and conducting tissue.
y Permanent tissues may be simple (made-up of one type of cell) or
complex (made-up of more than one type of cell).
y Simple permanent tissues include parenchyma, collenchyma and
schlerenchyma.
y Complex permanent tissues include xylem and phloem that
transport water and food respectively to all parts of the plant.
y Animal tissues are mainly of four types; epithelial, connective,
muscular and nervous tissues.
y Epithelial tissue forms the outer covering of the body or protective
lining to internal organs to provide protection and other functions.
y Connective tissue connects and supports various organs and
tissues of the body.
y Muscular tissue produces voluntary and involuntary movements
for locomotion, and other movements in the body.
y Nervous tissue consists of neurons to receive and transmit
impulses, and helps regulate body activities.
y Skeletal system protects organs and provides support.
y In our body, movement occurs by the coordination of muscles and
bones (musculoskeletal system), under the control of the nervous
system.
CChhaapptteerr--0033..iinndddd 4433 0033--0044--22002266 2200::0077::3388

Revise, Reflect, Refine
1. Meristematic tissues divide repeatedly. What property of their cells
allows them to do this?
(i) They have thick walls for protection.
(ii) They contain large vacuoles that store nutrients.
(iii) They have thin walls, dense cytoplasm and large prominent
nucleus.
(iv) They are functionally differentiated cells.
2. If a plant is unable to transport food from leaves to roots which tissue
is malfunctioning?
(i) Xylem
(ii) Phloem
(iii) Epidermis
(iv) Sclerenchyma
3. Why are the epithelial tissues that line an animal’s internal organs
usually only one or a few cells thick?
(i) To store food efficiently.
(ii) To provide maximum strength.
(iii) To allow quick exchange of materials across them.
(iv) To reduce friction.
4. You can perform these two jumps (Fig. 3.21):
Straight-leg jump — keep knees and ankles stiff.
Normal jump — bend knees and ankles naturally.
How did your ankle, knee and hip positions differ between the two
jumps?
Fig. 3.21
5. Which type of joint is involved when you bend your knees and ankles?
(i) Ball and socket
(ii) Hinge
(iii) Pivot
6. In each of the following cases (A, B, C and D), choose the correct option
as given below:
(i) Both (A) and (R) are true, and (R) is the correct explanation of (A).
(ii) Both (A) and (R) are true, but (R) is not the correct explanation
of (A).
(iii) (A) is true, but (R) is false.
(iv) (A) is false, but (R) is true.
A. Assertion: Epithelium is well-suited for gas exchange in the lungs.
Reason: It consists of multiple layers of tall cells that slow down
diffusion.
B. Assertion: Cardiac muscle can contract continuously without
fatigue.
Reason: Cardiac muscle cells have a high number of mitochondria
and an abundant blood supply.
44 Exploration|Grade 9
CChhaapptteerr--0033..iinndddd 4444 0044--0044--22002266 1155::2222::2277

Tissues in Action 45
C. Assertion: Tendons connect bone to bone and allow joint movement.
Reason: Tendons are made of tough connective tissue that transmits
force from muscle to bone.
D. Assertion: In a hinge joint, movement occurs primarily in one
plane.
Reason: The bone ends are shaped to allow sliding in all directions.
7. Plot a graph between the age of a tree (in years) on the x-axis and the
diameter of the tree (in cm) along with the number of annual rings
formed over time on the y-axis, using the data given in the Table 3.7.
Table 3.7: Data related to the age of a teak tree, and corresponding
increase in the diameter of stem and number of annual rings
DBH (Diameter at
Age of the teak Number of annual
S. No. Breast Height) of
tree (Years) rings formed
tree (cm)
1. 5 4 5
2. 10 8 10
3. 20 24 20
4. 25 28 25
5. 30 32 30
6. 40 40 40
(i) Analyse the graph in terms of the diameter of the stem over time
and share the interpretation.
(ii) What is the relation between the diameter of the teak tree to the
annual rings formed?
(iii) Which specialised tissue is responsible for the girth of the stem
and where is it located?
8. In a forest, it was observed that one of the trees
was severely debarked by an elephant to meet
its food requirements, as the bark is a rich
source of nutrients (Fig. 3.22). Based on your
learning, answer the following:
(i) Which function(s) of the tree is/are
hampered by debarking?
(ii) Which plant tissue would be affected by
Fig. 3.22
further damage to the tree trunk even
after debarking?
(iii) Which function of the tree would be hampered if the tissues
beneath the bark were severely damaged?
(iv) What assumptions are you making to answer the questions
above? How would the answer change if your assumptions are
also changed?
CChhaapptteerr--0033..iinndddd 4455 0044--0044--22002266 1155::2222::3344

9. Aamrapali observed that a young mango sapling’s stem bends flexibly
during monsoon winds and does not break. Which tissue is responsible
for this flexibility? Predict and provide your explanation of the impact
if the existing tissue was replaced by sclerenchyma.
10. Sohan designed an experiment for the
regeneration of sugarcane, where he
used cuttings to grow sugarcane. He used
two types of cuttings, type ‘A’ and type
‘B’ (Fig. 3.23). After a few weeks, type ‘B’
(A) (B)
cuttings sprouted and developed into
sugarcane plants, whereas the type ‘A’
cuttings did not sprout.
(i) Why were the type ‘B’ cuttings able to
grow as sugarcane but type ‘A’ could
not?
(ii) What difference was present in type ‘B’
compared to type ‘A’?
(iii) What observation or measurement
was made to determine whether this Fig. 3.23
change had an effect?
(iv) What parameters should be kept the same for both types of cuttings
to ensure a fair comparison?
11. During the discussion in class, Rohan gives a statement that, “A tissue
is a group of similar cells performing similar functions”. But Rajiv
counter argues that, “this is true in case of simple tissues but little
different in case of complex tissues”. Provide your explanation in view
of the discussion in class.
12. Coconut husk fibres are used for mats which are tough and fibrous.
Which tissue has structural features suitable for providing this
strength? Explain why living parenchyma couldn’t serve the same
purpose.
13. Vibha claims to her friend Neha that, “Meristematic cells are located
only at the root and shoot apices”. What do you think about this
statement? What question can Neha ask Vibha to help her understand
further if the statement is incorrect?
14. A plant cell and an animal cell are of the same size.
(i) Which cell will have a larger vacuole? Give reasons.
(ii) What assumptions are you making to answer the question above?
15. A textbook states, “Each plant tissue performs only one specific
function”. What questions would you ask to critically examine the
correctness of this statement? What examples of tissues would you
take to find out the answers to these questions?
46 Exploration|Grade 9
CChhaapptteerr--0033..iinndddd 4466 0033--0044--22002266 2200::0077::4477

Tissues in Action 47
The Journey Beyond
y Visit a doctor and find out what happens in ligament rupture, cartilage
rupture and fracture of bones. How can we reduce the risk by changing
our lifestyle and nutritional balance?
y Perform the following activity.
(i) Sit with your feet flat on the floor.
(ii) Place your fingers on the back of your ankle
just above the heel (Fig. 3.24).
(iii) Point your toes down and up, and you will feel
the tendon moving.
T endons are designed to withstand huge pulling
forces. Try exploring other tendons in your body
around the different joints.
y Reflect on any of the physical practices you are Fig. 3.24
familiar with, such as yoga, kabaddi, etc. How would it support bone
and muscle health?
y Reflect on any gardening methods you know, such as pruning, grafting,
irrigation or crop rotation. How does each practice support the healthy
functioning of plant tissues like meristems, conducting tissues or
supporting tissues?
y Turn a nature walk into a research project.
(i) Observe different leaves and study their adaptations for various
environments, such as desert, very moist or aquatic habitats.
(ii) Consult an elder community resource persons about their
knowledge on different plant leaves, such as leaves that remain
fresh for a long time, repel water or deter insects. Find out their
traditional uses, such as making plates, preparing cooling wraps
or functioning as insect repellents.
y Study various dance forms of different tribal communities across the
country. Each student learn and experience at least five steps. Observe
the joint movements involved in performing these steps and then
develop a dance or drama on the concept of joint movements. Perform
this at the school’s annual function so that students from different
grades can learn from it.
Fig. 3.25
The Quest Continues…
Will it be possible to obtain a complete animal from an animal cell like plants?
If yes, what would be the advantages and challenges of this development?
CChhaapptteerr--0033..iinndddd 4477 0044--0044--22002266 1155::2222::3399

